I'm joined by Professor Jonathan van Tom
our deputy chief medical officer and by
Baroness dodo Harding the chair of NHS
improvement and of our test and trace
program today we formally launch NHS
tests and trace this is an incredibly
important milestone for the country and
I know people will want to hear about it
before I do I'd just like to update you
on the latest coronavirus data three
million seven hundred and ninety eight
thousand four hundred and ninety tests
have now been carried out in the UK
including a hundred and seventeen
thousand and thirteen tests yesterday
two hundred and sixty seven thousand two
hundred and forty people have tested
positive which is an increase of two
thousand and thirteen cases yesterday
all those who tested positive for
coronavirus across all settings thirty
seven thousand four hundred and sixty
people have sadly died and since
yesterday four hundred and twelve deaths
have been recorded we mourn and we will
not forget them as I said yesterday
thanks to your effort and sacrifice we
are past the peak we flattened the curve
we protected the NHS and the big
question that we're all working to
answer is this until an effective
treatment or vaccine comes through how
can we get back to doing more of the
things that make life worth living
without risking safety or putting lives
at risk
NHS tests and trace is a big part not
the only part but a big part of the
answer to that question
NHS test and trace means we can start to
replace the national lockdown with
individual isolation for those who've
been in contact with the virus and local
action where it's necessary to respond
to a flower the concept is simple first
through testing we hunt down the virus
finding out who is infected right now
and I use we very deliberately because
we all have our part to play this is a
national effort and we all have a role
if you have symptoms you must isolate
immediately and get yourself a test
yesterday 2013 people tested positive
and the next step is that through
contact tracing like detectives the NHS
clinician from NHS tests and trace and
the person who's tested positive work
together to identify the possible
movements of the virus where it's been
and who else it might have infected then
we isolate those contacts who might have
been infected so the virus is unable to
spread and we break the chain of
transmission think of it like this the
virus exists only to reproduce that is
its sole biological purpose to make as
many copies of itself as possible if we
can for that purpose we can control the
virus and ultimately defeat it we must
all follow the NHS test and trace
instructions because this is how we
control the virus and protect the NHS
and save lives some people have asked
why now why not launch this program
earlier in the course of the pandemic
the answer is because we needed to
flatten the curve right at the start of
the epidemic we had a contact tracing
system in place but as the virus rage
towards its peak the number of
infections grew so large that we needed
a national lockdown that was the only
way to get it under control effectively
everyone in the country was contacted
and told to stay at home now we've got
the number of new infections each day
right down and the number of contacts of
those who've tested positive is small
enough that we can be in touch with
everyone that we need to and of course
testing kept the capacity is critical to
making the
work we now have the capacity for a
hundred and sixty one thousand tests a
day and because of that increased
capacity I can announce that we're
expanding eligibility yet further from
tomorrow we're expanding eligibility for
testing to include the under fives so
that now every single person who has
symptoms of corona virus can get a test
no matter their age and what's more to
make NHS tests and trace as effective as
possible it is very important that
everyone with symptoms must isolate
immediately and go and get a test now I
want to thank and pay tribute to
everyone who's been involved in making
this big project happen Dido Harding
who's led the work the technicians in
the labs who've been making mass testing
a reality the contact tracers Manning
the phones the health care staff
providing the expert advice and the
companies who've helped us put it all
together at a record scale and pace and
what really matters is this to protect
your friends and your family testing and
tracing must become a new way of life
this is being launched today in England
Northern Ireland already has a system in
place and my colleagues in the Scottish
and Welsh governments are working to
bring in a system as soon as they can
all four nations have been working
together to make sure we have systems
that are coordinated across the whole
country
and the instructions to people are clear
if you get symptoms isolate immediately
and get a test if you are contacted by
NHS tests and trace instructing you to
isolate you must it is your civic duty
so you avoid unknowingly spreading the
virus and you help to break the chain of
transmission this will be voluntary at
first because we trust everyone to do
the right thing but we can quickly make
it mandatory if that's what it
because if we don't collectively make
this work then the only way forward is
to keep the lock down put better the
more people follow the instructions the
safer we will be and the faster we can
safely lift the lockdown so do it for
the people you love do it for your
community do it for the NHS and do it
for all those frontline workers who've
done so much and gone out every day to
put themselves at risk to keep you and
your family safe and in return for
following those instructions you'll have
the knowledge that when the call came
you did your bit at a time when it
really mattered when the whole country
who are desperate to see their families
we're counting on you to do the right
thing you did your bit to bring us all
closer together and closer to the day
when we can be reunited this system will
start tomorrow morning at 9:00 a.m. and
the first people who'll be contacted
will be the people who received a
positive result today this is a very
distinct change on our approach and I
just want to take a moment to recap the
extent of the change before today we
said isolate to anyone with coronavirus
symptoms and their households this
remains a vital from 9:00 a.m. tomorrow
in addition if you are contacted by an
NHS test and trace advisor advising you
that you must isolate then you must do
that whether you have symptoms or not
now I also know that for those without
symptoms who receive that call I fully
acknowledge that this is a big ask and
that you're going to make a sacrifice
but it's for a purpose and the purpose
is the safety of everyone because know
that you can have the virus and spread
it to other people without ever having
symptoms at all and it's not just the
safety of all but the liberty at all of
all that is at stake here
we're only in a position to be able to
reopen primary schools and outdoor
markets if their covert secure this
coming Monday because we've flattened
the curve and now we have this system in
place and in the coming weeks we will
gradually and very carefully move away
from a lockdown that's national in scope
blanketing application and start moving
towards a system that's much more
targeted in scope and focuses local
action on tackling local flare-ups this
will help us restore some of the basic
freedoms that matter so much to people
and doing some of the things that people
are yearning to do like seeing friends
and family booking a holiday or getting
a haircut
all the while controlling the virus and
keeping people safe it's a brand new
service on a scale never seen before
there will be bumps in the road but we
will constantly improve it and in the
weeks ahead we'll ramp up the service
still further and once the system's
bedded in we'll roll out the NHS contact
tracing app that is being piloted in the
Isle of Wight and of course NHS tests
and trace is only one part of the answer
it's not the whole answer all the action
we're taking to get are down and peep
are down it all requires us to keep
doing the right thing testing and
tracing will help us to hunt down this
virus it's one of the tools with which
we can finish the job and we all need to
play our part so please stay alert
control the virus and save lives I'm now
going to ask
Baroness Harding to set out some more of
the details of NHS tests and trace and
then professor van tam to take us
through the daily statistics Thank You
Secretary of State's this is a brand new
service which has been launched at scale
in a very short space of time and as the
secretary of state has just said we all
have a part to play and it will only
succeed if each of us does our bit I
want you to feel safe and confident to
play an active part in NHS tests and
trace for you your loved ones and our
country we do need you to follow the
following 3-step
it's step one if you have one or more of
the symptoms of coronavirus a fever a
new continuous cough or a loss of your
sense of taste or smell you must
immediately self isolate step two you
should then book a test on the NHS dot
uk' slash coronavirus site or if you
don't have internet access by dialing
one one nine do not leave home for any
other reason if you test positive you
will then be contacted by the NHS test
and trace service within 24 hours all
contact tracers have been undergoing
training and induction before the
beginning of this week and before they
start work step 3 NHS test and trace
will help you establish who you've been
in close contact with and so who you
might have infected and will gather
their contact details
this could include members of your
household or someone you've been within
two meters of for more than 15 minutes
you will also be given clinical advice
and support for dealing with the disease
yourself NHS tests and trace in turn
will get in touch with those contacts so
if you've been exposed to an infected
person they will be in contact with you
you will then be instructed by the NHS
to self isolate for 14 days even if you
don't have symptoms or you feel
perfectly well you need to follow these
instructions this individual and
collective effort is vital if we're to
keep the rate of infection down and
carefully lift the lockdown we're
working hand in hand with communities
and local authorities to make sure that
you have the support you need to cope
when you are self isolating this is why
the government announced last week it's
giving 300 million pounds to local
government to support this on-the-ground
tailoring support in response to your
local needs over the past few days and
weeks I've spoken to a huge number of
people and I've heard real support
and a desire to make this work we all
want to get back to a more normal way of
life and this is an important step on
that journey NHS test and trace is one
of the most ambitious and complex
projects that any of us have ever worked
on it's brought together so many people
from all walks of life to work together
on this common goal we already employ
over 40,000 people both directly and
through trusted partners who were
working heroically to deliver both
testing and contact tracing at scale
across the country so I'd like to offer
my heartfelt thanks to public health
England all our NHS colleagues local
authorities and their directors of
public health and their teams all our
partners in both the public and private
sector who have helped create the
largest network of diagnostic testing
facilities in British history and to
everyone who has signed up to be a
contact tracer and I'd also like to
thank you we will be constantly
developing and improving as we go
together we can help contain the virus
stop it spreading further and return to
a more normal way of life thank you
thank you very much
Baroness Harding and now professor van
Tam will take us through the daily
statistics Thank You Secretary of State
good afternoon
next slide please so the first update
I'm going to give you this afternoon is
one relating to transport use in Great
Britain and you can see on this slide
there are six data sets arrayed the top
three are for small motor vehicles or
individual motor vehicles cars like good
vehicles and heavy goods vehicles the
data are arrayed from the left of the
slide 16th of March to the 25th of May
and what you can see for cars and for
light goods vehicles is over that period
after the initial lockdown a gradual
increase over time in transport use for
heavy goods vehicles the trend is the
same but you can see it starts
from a much higher baseline reflecting
the fact that many of the HGV journeys
were essential even at the point of
initial lockdown
if you then turn to the lower part of
the slide you'll see the data for
national rail for Transport for London
and then for buses other than Transport
for London other than London buses and
you can see here essentially very flat
curves indeed showing that people have
stayed away from public transport are
continuing to stay away from public
transport and preserve this for
essential workers next slide please
on testing this is a recap following the
delivery by the secretary of state you
can see that as off 27th of May 117,000
tests were delivered in in the previous
24 hours and bringing us to a total of
almost 3.8 million and you can see in
terms of the trend at the top of the
slide the red graph you can see that
essentially there is now a very high
level of testing that continues in the
UK these are tests conducted and tests
shipped and please remember that a very
small proportion of individuals may have
been tested twice in amongst those data
then turning to confirmed cases who have
tested positive you can see that as of
the 27th of May the figure was at 2013
and a total of 267 thousand in total
rather more importantly I'd like you to
look at the blue trend curve which is a
7 day rolling average and continues to
show the decline in confirmed cases over
time next slide please
now this slide shows the data from
hospitals at the top of the slide it is
England only at the bottom of the slide
it is the four nations each arrayed
separately on the traces so for
admissions with kovat 19 in england we
are at a figure of 472
which is considerably down on the 637
reported on the 8th of 18th of May and
you can see that continuing decline in
hospital admissions reflected on the
upper graph then in terms of the
percentage of ICU ventilator beds
occupied by Kovac 19 patients you can
see in all four nations on the lower
graph a very clear and sustained
downward trend and we are now at 11
percent of total ventilator ventilatory
capacity occupied by Kovac 19 patients I
continue with hospital data now I'm
showing the total number of people in
hospital not new admissions with kovat
19 across the UK and you can see you can
pick whichever of the regional or
country specific curves you like but
what you can see overall is this
continued downward trend in people total
number of people in hospital with kovat
19 we are currently at 8,000 879 which
is down from just over 10,000 at the
same time last week final slide please
and finally I will look at the the co
vid 19 deaths confirmed with a positive
test you understand that there are
always some deaths which are due to
Kovac 19 which are not confirmed with a
positive test the latest daily figure is
412 most importantly again I'd like you
to look at the graph and look at the
seven-day rolling average the yellow
curve and you can see here there is a
continued and sustained downwards curve
thank you say Tuesday thanks very much
indeed
so we'll now go to questions from the
public before taking questions from
journalists and just to remind everybody
that these questions from the public
just like these questions from journey
the three of us don't see in advance and
we'll give them give the very best
answers that we possibly can and so the
first question by video is from Ella
from Maidan head
Ella given evidence has shown that those
under the age of 45 are at a
significantly lower risk of death from
COBIT 19 can we expect to see the
lifting of lockdown restrictions
targeted a particular age groups well
thank you very much Ella that is a great
question and I think I'll very I'll give
a very high-level response and then ask
professor phantom to give the more
detail and the science and essentially
although those under the age of 80 45
are significantly lower risk of serious
impact of the disease the evidence show
that we are in fact just as likely to
get it and to transmit it so although
it's it's it's safer for us the impact
of those of us under 45 on the spread of
the disease is just as great so the
focus especially of asking those over 72
to take particular care is because of
the risk to them rather than because
they're more likely to spread the
disease and then than younger people and
so professor van Town maybe you can give
more detail to that answer Thank You
secretary Thank You Ella for the
question the first thing I'd like to say
is that whilst it is absolutely true
that the death rate due to kovat 19 is
very very age dependent and very steeply
rising and particularly as we go above
the age of 60 it is simply not true that
all under forty fives are not at risk
there are some under forty five year
olds with very high risk conditions who
would be extremely vulnerable and at
risk of death if they caught kovat 19
that's the rather minor point the major
points I think have all
made by the Secretary of State that the
infection rates are not any lower in 45
under 45 year olds their propensity to
transmit the infection is probably
greater than those of an older age group
simply based on the number of social
contacts and social networking that they
have the potential to do in an
unrestricted way and that's very
important the whole game about beating
Cove in 19 is for now until we get a
vaccine until we get effective antiviral
drugs is to reduce contact between
people and particularly reduce contacts
between households to a level that is
safe and as safe as we can make it
consistent with trying to live with this
virus so from that perspective I would
have real concerns about the under forty
fives being picked out for any special
measures because of their potential
propensity as youngsters to have wider
social networks and to transmit more to
other people fantastic Thank You
professor van Tam and Ella I hope that
answers your question I'm going to add
one final point which you might hear
quite a lot from us over the next few
days and weeks which is that for
everybody it will be easier to lift the
national lockdown measures the more that
people follow the instructions they're
given if they're called by NHS tests and
trace because that is about targeting
people who are at highest risk because
we know they've been in contact with
somebody who's tested positive and we're
now going to go to the next question
which is from Chris from Whitley Bay and
Chris asks although we recognize that
we're far from this pandemic being over
has the government been able to start
formulating a strategy for future
pandemics so that future generations can
be more prepared and Chris the answer is
emphatically yes we're learning all we
can about this disease and about
to handle this pandemic all the way
through in fact earlier this afternoon
the Prime Minister has been talking
about some of the lessons from SARS a
previous pandemic that had a very big
impact in East Asia but less so here and
it is incredibly important that we learn
as much as we possibly can about the
strategy for future pandemics exactly as
you say so that future generations can
be as prepared as possible thanks Chris
will now turn to questions from
journalists the first is from Sophie
Hutchinson from the BBC hi Sophie and
you've described this new test and trace
program as being on a scale never seen
before but are you sure you have
sufficient capacity to test the contacts
of all of those infected you've referred
to there being around 2,000 newly
infected people in the UK every day but
the office for national statistics puts
that figure at around 9,000 for England
alone Thank You Sophie I'm going to give
a very short answer and then ask Dido to
give more detail there's 2013 people
yesterday who tested positive you're
quite right that the Office for National
Statistics testing survey estimates that
there are around 9000 between 7 and 9
thousand we think people who actually
had coronavirus we need as many of them
as possible to come forward for testing
to make sure that they can then have
their contacts traced through the NHS
test and tracing system so we we do need
to make sure that everybody who has
symptoms comes forward so that we can
find as many cases as possible and
therefore they can they can get the
benefits of the NHS tests and tray
system and we can use it with its full
capacity to to trace and hunt down the
virus and on the more detail the
question Dido so we have 25,000 contact
races ready to start work tomorrow that
is easily enough to trace down the
contacts today when
the vast majority of us are in lockdown
so what we've seen in the Isle of Wight
where we've been trying actually at the
moment most of us have very few close
contacts because we're we're in lockdown
so maybe less than five have been
genuinely within two meters of us for
more than 15 minutes so if anything I'm
worried tomorrow that many of my
brilliant contact races are not going to
be very busy tomorrow as we start to
encourage more people to get a test we
do expect that we will scale up the
service as lockdown measures are
gradually released and we'll scale it up
both in human and in technology form so
one of the things that when you first
are contacted you'll be contacted online
and by SMS and if you can you will enter
all the details electronically and
you'll be contacted by a person only if
you haven't been able to do that so
there's actually really very large
capacity today and that'll only get
augmented as we roll out the app can I
come back to you very briefly go ahead
and I mean you've mentioned that testing
is critical for this tracing service to
work and of course it is have you
therefore ironed out the problems we've
been hearing of doctors who still can't
get tests or people waiting for tests
for up to a week will that have all been
sorted out by tomorrow well yesterday
the turnaround time of our tests we
returned 84% of all tests in our driving
centres within 24 hours and 95% of all
tests within 48 hours I still don't
think that's good enough it's got to get
better and better and there will be
examples where the turnaround time
hasn't been fast enough and we as you
rightly say an important part of this
service is the speed with which we go as
individuals from recognizing that we've
got the symptoms to the point at which
the people we've been in close contact
with are isolated so all of us have got
a role to play in speeding that up
actually there's been tremendous
progress in the last few weeks in those
turnaround times for testing and I think
we are in good shape to start tomorrow
but we will continue improving and
learning as we get going
and this is a very large service that
has it
first full day of operation tomorrow so
there will be some kinks for sure but
we're committed to listening and
learning to the user and citizen
feedback to keep improving I hope that
answers your question Sophie thank you
we'll turn to Robert Peston from ITV
good afternoon yesterday Secretary of
State you raised the prospect of us
moving from a national lockdown that
we're living through now which is being
eased into the potential for local
lockdowns if there are local flare-ups
who will identify whether at our block
or a couple of roads have to be locked
down and how will that be communicated
who will enforce it well I'll ask Dido
again to take us through the detail of
this of course making sure we make the
local judgments where the directors of
public health have got a critical role
to play and and we tie that up with the
national level intelligence that we have
for instance from the testing program
through the new joint biosecurity Center
and through public health England this
is a critical task it's something public
health England have long experience in
doing for all sorts of of infectious
disease outbreaks that happen in in
normal times and it's all part of the
overall NHS test and tray system that
Baroness Harding is putting together so
what we're building is a genuine
national effort it's both national in
scale in terms of the 25,000 contact
tracers working in their homes across
the country but actually the way we will
stamp out spread of infection is going
to be local action so that's why the
government granted 300 million pounds
last week to local authorities it's
higher to local authorities that have
the statutory responsibility for Public
Health who employ the experts who will
be the people who arrive when you start
to see a rise in infection in a
community in a school or in a hospital
or in some parts
of your town who will help us work
through what to do I needs to be locally
led and nationally supported supported
with data and supported with scale so
that you can get an early warning that
trouble might be might be brewing thanks
very much does that answer your question
Robert I think that's because you can I
just also just follow up with this whole
question of where you isolate and this
is not just the uncertainty which some
people think has been introduced by what
Dominic Cummings did but just in general
you know let's just say I I haven't got
symptoms but I get a call that says I've
been in contact with somebody who does
has tested positive
do I have to isolate at my normal home
am I allowed to isolate somewhere else
so that others in my household can get
on with their lives
what is the rule there so it really
important point to make is that if you
are a contact of somebody who's tested
positive so not somebody who's tested
positive yourself but you've been
contacted by the NHS test and trace
program and you are instructed to
isolate your household members do not
have to isolate they can carry on under
the normal guidelines and that means
that you can go home and do your
isolation there thanks very much
the next question is from Charlotte from
talk radio Charlotte thank you and this
morning the community secretary talks
about the idea that the law allows for
people to use their good judgment when
interpreting how the coronavirus
guidelines affect them so wondering if
you could give us a bit of a sense of
what this means on a practical basis so
for example if one of our listeners get
stopped by the police and the listener
believes they are using their good
judgment but the police officer
disagrees whose judgments Trump's the
other ones well thank you Charlotte the
there are exceptional circumstances that
are written into the the guidelines and
we set out some of the
details of these in advance and some of
the examples are there in the guidelines
and the police themselves have set out a
huge degree of detail to make sure that
these these rules can properly be
enforced and policed from the point of
view of the new NHS test and trace
program that we're launching today in
the first instance this will be
voluntary we think that there is a very
very strong instinct from the British
people to follow these two so that when
the NHS phones you up or contacts you
and says you must isolate then are we
we're confident that people will now of
course we could also mandate that but in
the first instance we're not going to we
want people to feel safe to tell NHS
tests and trace as soon as they have
symptoms to feel confident and safe and
telling and it just testin trace who
they've been with so that we can isolate
people who might be infectious as fast
as possible and I have great faith in
the British public that we all want to
be able to get our lives back to normal
and that we are committed to doing that
together thanks very much professor van
Town also yes I just come back in here
and remind people that with this virus
the natural are is around about three
that means left unchecked one case in
facts three more so it's going to grow
out of control very quickly the extent
to which we can keep control of it very
much depends upon the extent to which
people across our entire population
engage with and cooperate with NHS tests
and trace and put simply the more we do
so the greater room for manoeuvre the
government will have in terms of making
life as normal as possible whilst still
keeping this virus under control
thanks very much I hope that answered
the question of Charlotte come back can
I just check obviously it is clear that
there are some gray
as here when there are gray areas whose
authority is it that decides whether
something is in keeping with the law
well in those areas where we have made
regulations that are mandatory there is
a normal system and process in which the
police police those and then the court
system is there ultimately to make
decisions however in NHS tests and trace
we're not bringing in a mandatory system
at least in the first instance because
we have the faith in the British people
that they will follow what is needed
because it is the right thing to do for
themselves it's the right thing to do
for their loved ones and their families
and it's the right thing to do for
people's whole communities because it
will make it less likely that wider
action will be needed locally and
because it will make it less likely
that's a local flare up so the the civic
duty and the personal responsibility to
follow the instructions of NHS tests and
trace is a very important part of what
we're asking people to do for following
the launch of the service from 9 o'clock
tomorrow morning when the first people
will start to get contact from NHS tests
and trace and asked to do something that
we recognise is a big ask which is to to
isolate self isolate for two weeks
thanks very much Charlotte next question
is Hugo guy from the eye Thank You
Secretary of State is the reason that
the tracing app has been delayed from
its original launch date because of
problems with the trial on the Isle of
Wight and are you confident both you and
Ernest Harding are you confident that
the test and try scheme will continue to
work even if the app never works as
originally intended the answer to the
first question is no it's not technical
problems it's that one of the things we
learnt about in the Isle of Wight is
that rolling out the system where people
are asked to isolate even if they have
no symptoms and starts better when it
comes in in human form from the from the
contact tracers and the the
is working in the Isle of Wight and when
we have successfully embedded this new
principle that I talked about today that
vanish Harding's set out in great detail
this new principle which is if you are
called contacted by the NHS test and
trace program even if you have no
symptoms then you need to isolate for up
to 14 days once that principle is
embedded then that's the time to bring
the app to bear because the app is a
complement to this system even without
it this system would be successful but
it's a compliment because there are some
contacts that it's that you don't know
that you might have made for instance if
you're sitting near somebody on a bus
within 2 metres of them you wouldn't
know that how to get in contact with
that person but through the app system
we will be able to identify those
contacts so the app is a compliment it
is best brought forward once this system
is embedded and that's what we plan to
do it's not because of any technical
glitches thanks very much and the deme
white from the huffington post new data
has revealed that black Asian and
minority ethnic people in England of 54
percent more likely to be fined under
coronavirus rules than white people
if Dominic Cummings were black it is
statistically more likely he would have
been stopped by police while out with
his family what is your message to
Britain's black communities who worry
that fines are not being issued fairly
and I also have a question for professor
Bantam we know that public health
England review into disproportionate
pain deaths from Kovach 19 is due by the
end of this month are you able to share
any preliminary findings at this time
this is obviously a really pressing
issue
thanks Nadine this is an incredibly
important issue and of course it's vital
that the the rules where there is man
Dacian are policed without fear or favor
and fairly and
equally according to the evidence and
I'll ask professor van tan to respond on
the point about the research yes so
thank you for the question
clearly I'm from an ethnic minority I
regard this as very pressing and very
important I have heard from public
health England that the report is on
schedule per timelines I believe that
the report is going to be very
comprehensive when it comes out it is
also going to deal inevitably with
enormous complexity something that I've
talked about before now
how are you unpick age gender underlying
comorbidities crowding deprivation all
of these things how you one pick them
from the black and minority ethnic
signal that is also in the data and so
I'm not going to kind of trail this and
give you lots of new findings at this
point because I think that's for public
health England to do in their own time
but I will say again it's pressing I
believe it to be on schedule it's going
to be comprehensive and it is going to
involve quite a bit of complexity and
care with how we interpret it and what
we take for words and how thanks very
much Nadine final question is from Dan
Martin of Leicestershire live thank you
thank you mentioned earlier that schools
that you start going back from Monday
but we know hearing their leicester
message that two-thirds of parents are
unhappy about sending their kids back to
the timetable the government has been to
this despite the best efforts of
councils and then teachers here there's
still clearly a an issue of public
confidence about a safe return so what
more coming should the government be
doing to help parents make what is a
very difficult decision well I think
this is a really important question dan
and it right across Leicestershire I
would say to parents of children who are
in reception year year 1 or year 6 which
is the three years of primary school
that coming back on Monday I would say
that we wouldn't have made this decision
unless it was safe and we've considered
all of the factors and there is a a very
very very low impact of the disease on
children and there's a there's clear
measures been put in place by the
Department for Education and by schools
and to make sure that the schools are
safe for children and so I would urge
parents to take that very seriously of
course many schools have been open
throughout with the children of key
workers in them as well and I'm very
grateful to the to all the schools
who've stayed open for instance so that
NHS staff and staff in social care have
been able to send their children to
school and there's one further thing
that can give people that confidence and
I'll ask Baroness Harding to come in on
this and that is that with the NHS tests
and trace program in place it means that
we'll be able to be more targeted in
finding those positive cases in making
sure that we find out all of the
contacts that they may have infected and
passed the disease onto and therefore
use this more targeted approach to be
able to control the virus so state said
earlier we're extending the eligibility
for tests to the under fives that's
really important for for our early years
children and schools and the way NHS
tests and trace will work is that it
will provide an early warning system for
local communities to spot that there are
may be a growing number of cases in a
school and immediate action can be taken
so it's not just that we will be
contacting and identifying and isolating
everyone very quickly we'll also be able
to spot if an outbreak is starting so I
think parents across the country can
feel really confident that we've got a
system that's got their back thanks very
much Dan thanks very much for your
question great to have you here in
Downing Street
that concludes our daily coronavirus
briefing see you again soon
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC dovecote UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News